Introduction
You probably like history and have some knowledge of a particular culture. But it's also likely that you haven't yet found a convincing reason to study this subject. Nevertheless, so that you can understand its importance, imagine what would happen if we didn't have any information about life in the past. In such circumstances, we would lack a basis of previous accomplishments to inspire our innovations and to help us build our future. But thanks to the rich sociocultural information at our disposal, it's possible to look to the past for answers and invaluable testimonies.
This topic invites you to reflect about the historic legacy, the day-to-day life of our ancestors, and the evolution of knowledge accumulated by humans throughout the ages. To begin this exciting journey, you will greatly benefit by a brief review of the origins of civilization and the diverse situations that led to sophisticated artifacts and human cultures. To this end, you need to analyze the rise of the first agricultural civilizations in the Middle and Far East and their political and economic structure. You should also consider the main cultural features and daily life of its inhabitants. In addition, you will learn about the consolidation of the Greek civilization, cradle of democracy and western philosophy. This initial analysis will end with a discussion of the millennial Roman Empire, focusing on its great military and technological conquests, as well as on its versatile political organization and the life of its inhabitants.
Explanation
1.1 Ancient Societies: The Fertile Crescent and the Far East
Do you know what great human invention is considered the dividing point between prehistoric and historic times?  Writing is the exceptional advance which has permitted our society to record our experience for the benefit of future generations. It is in a historic region now known as the Fertile Crescent where this journey begins.
Click the button to see the image of the crossing.
Rome - Greece - Egypt - Indus Valley
The Fertile Crescent refers to the territory approximately spanning the present-day countries of Egypt, Israel, Palestine, and Iraq. The Fertile Crescent derives its name from its shape, which is similar to the waxing crescent moon. Within this region, several civilizations developed, including the ancient Egyptians, Sumerians, Akkadians, Persians, Chaldeans, and Phoenicians (among others). The Nile, Tigris, and Euphrates Rivers, as well as the coast of the Mediterranean, served as fertile sources of water and transportation for these societies whose economy depended on agriculture.
Click play to transport yourself through the video to ancient Mesopotamia. Begin your journey through time.
Click to view video
TvTuner.CO. (2014, September 18). Mesopotamia: Return to Eden [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6tGyQqfXoSw


Based on the video, what does the word Mesopotamia mean? What was the first Mesopotamian civilization? What material was used for construction in Mesopotamia? What technology allowed cities to develop in Mesopotamia? The Sumerians, in ancient Mesopotamia (now Iraq), developed the first system of writing and were also the first to measure time like we do today, dividing the day into twenty-four hours, each hour into sixty minutes, and each minute into sixty seconds.

On the other hand, ancient Egypt was born under the protection of the Nile and would be responsible for the construction of large monuments, the development of numerous techniques and discoveries, and the conquest of vast territories. Traditionally, the origin of ancient Egypt is dated around the year 3000 B.C. with the unification of the older kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt. The political structure was typical for the time period: an absolute monarchy. As an absolute monarch, the king (pharaoh) ruled as he wished. He was considered to be the reincarnation of a deity. Imagine the power he wielded over the population. As you might assume, the polytheistic religion, based on the belief in many gods, played a vital role in Egyptian society. Through the religion, the pharaoh claimed his legitimacy as an absolute ruler and at the same time wielded economic power, since the temples served as centers of tax collection, storing accumulated currency. In order to assert his rule, pharaoh also used the figure of the vizier, who was his representative in legal administration and other governmental tasks.

The pyramids of Giza
Image retrieved from http://egipto.travelguia.net/las-piramides-de-giza.html, for educational purposes only.
The Egyptian economy was based on the cultivation of wheat and barley, as well as raising various animals, such as donkeys and oxen. After strengthening its borders, Egypt ventured into commerce, establishing contact with other societies such as the Nubians, Canaanites, and later Greeks. Successful commerce and the abundance of fertile land (as a result of the Nile's flooding), allowed Egypt to build a civilization renowned for the structural monuments such as the pyramids ofGiza), Giza,  which continue to captivate residents and visitors.
What was the purpose of the pyramids? Name a god worshiped by the Egyptians. What did the Egyptians believe would happen after death? As you learned from the video, religion was very important to the Egyptians. Are there any similarities between the views of Egyptians on the afterlife and the views of current society? Their society was class-based. Do you think this system exists today? Slaves wore no clothing while the clothing of the upper classes varied, based on the weather, for instance. Their clothing was made of linen, obtained from a plant that grew on the borders of the Nile River. Egyptians were very self-conscious about their appearance and even about their aroma, which they doctored with oils.
Just as the study of ancient Egypt reveals interesting cultural developments, other aspects of technological advances and cultural sophistication can be identified in other civilizations of the Fertile Crescent. For example, the Chaldean civilization is famous for building the awe-inspiring hanging gardens, considered one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. In the same vein, one can mention the Minoans, a civilization that developed on the island of Crete, but which also established colonies on Cyprus. Located at the far west of the Fertile Crescent, Cyprus has become famous as the birthplace of the celebrated myth of the Minotaur. The Minotaur was supposedly a creature half-man, half-bull that lived in a convoluted labyrinth.
In the same way, the search for technical knowledge was essential for these civilizations, which left behind impressive artifacts they needed to survive in hostile environments as well as to defend themselves. Remember that war was a constant in the ancient world.
We must not forget to mention that in addition to the civilizations of the Fertile Crescent, there were other sophisticated societies in antiquity. For example, in the Indus River valley (currently India and Pakistan), an important culture flourished, establishing commerce with Egypt and Mesopotamia. The Indus valley culture showed great skill in urban construction and metallurgy, leaving behind numerous artifacts made of precious metals.  The most important city was Mohenjo-Daro.
Would you like to see the ruins of this ancient city?
Click play on the video called Archaeological Ruins at Mohenjo-Daro.
Finally, this discussion cannot pass over the cultural developments experienced in the region of current-day China. At that time, a Chinese empire flourished along the Yellow (Huang He) and Blue (Yangtze) Rivers, the origin of the millenary culture we generally study according to dynasties. The Xia dynasty and consequently the Shang were the first to make an impressive effort to formalize political and cultural cohesion among the various people groups which inhabited what is now the north of China. Just like the civilizations of the Fertile Crescent, the Chinese civilizations also grew along the shores of a river, based their economy on agriculture (mainly rice), and organized their government around the figure of an emperor.
1.2 Greek Civilization
What comes to your mind when you hear someone talk about classical Greece? The famous columns of the ancient Parthenon temple or the image of important philosophers such as Socrates and Plato? To begin a brief journey into this spectacular culture, enjoy learning some interesting details in the following video.
Click to view video
AncientDiscoveryHistory. (2013, December 21). The Ancient Greeks – Engineering an Empire [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WWuuPmGltM


What did the Greeks call themselves? Using the information from the video and the study of this topic, try to identify the contributions of the Greeks to our current culture. Keep in mind that in the eighth century, the Greek populations began to experience an accelerated process of change and development. Under the stimulating Western influence of peoples such as the Hittites, Egyptians and Assyrians, and the commercial growth resulting from that influence, the first city-states or polis began to appear. These societies were small self-governed units. Though we now associate the concept of state with a specific territory enclosing various cities, in ancient Greece, the city assumed power as the nucleus of the state with its own identity, culture and government. You've probably already heard of two famous city-states, Athens, and Sparta.
These polis had different types of government: while Sparta became a strictly military elite society, Athens developed into a democracy (a word that comes from the Greek roots demos, meaning “the people” and cratia, meaning “power”). Amid constant wars and conflicts, the polis ended up losing power. Eventually, the kingdom of Macedonia, located to the north of the area of Greek influence, began to gain military power and conquered the Greek populations one by one until they formed a unified kingdom.
The kingdom of Macedonia eventually became an empire when the renowned Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire and Egypt. What do you think was Alexander the Great's ultimate objective? What allowed him to occupy such an important place in history? You must understand that when he died, the Greek civilization was at the peak of its power and influence. But after his death, Macedonia gradually began to decline, a situation that the ancient polis took advantage of to begin recovering independence. Nevertheless, toward the beginning of the second century B.C., the Roman Republic annexed Greece, putting an end to the political independence of the polis.
The Roman conquest, however, did not denote a significant change in the culture and daily life of the Greeks. The two civilizations had the same religious practices and numerous cultural similarities. The spirit of Greek culture survived practically intact until the arrival, dissemination, and triumph of Christianity in the sixth century A.D. In fact, it is the cultural, literary, artistic, and philosophical legacy of ancient Greece that most deserves our attention.
At its peak, Greece established itself as the center of cultural development in the Western world. The Greek society proved to be the birthplace of many authors and other personages who have laid the foundation for the Western paradigm (system of beliefs) in which we still live; therefore, we can recognize our worldview’s Greek roots through the study of the Greek legacy.
The canon of western literature originated in the works The Iliad and The Odyssey, attributed to the immortal Homer.
It was the cradle of western philosophy, with authors such as Socrates, father of Western ethics; Plato, father of philosophical idealism; and Aristotle, father of realism. The ideas of these and other Greek authors provide most of the foundation for our concept of knowledge, being, and the cosmos. These key elements in our understanding of our environment and nature inspire our inquisitiveness and reflection, the noblest aspect of humanity.
Herodotus, now considered the father of history, was the first person in the Western world to systematize the conservation of the human memory.
Hippocrates and Galen of Pergamon, famous Greek physicians, provided the basis of Western medical practice until well into the eighteenth century.
1.3 Roman Civilization
Continuing our journey, we will head to Rome. Whoever has visited this city cannot help marveling at the monumental architectural legacy it preserves. An especially outstanding contribution is the famous Coliseum or Flavian Amphitheatre. But first, let's talk about its beginning: according to legend, around the eighth century B.C., twins Romulus and Remus, raised by a wolf, founded the city of Rome in the middle of the Italian Peninsula. Around the new city, inhabited by outcasts from neighboring communities, a small kingdom began to emerge which would eventually become the largest and most powerful empire in the ancient world. 
Rome had different forms of government, in the following order:
Rome evolved from a kingdom to a republic toward the end of the sixth century B.C. only to later become an empire organized around the emperor, who claimed a semidivine origin. In the transition from republic to empire, Rome annexed Ptolemaic Egypt. The kingdom subsequently experienced dramatic growth in territory and population, establishing control over Hispania (now Spain and Portugal), Gaul (France), Britannia (the United Kingdom), Anatolia, (Turkey) and the Levant (Israel and Palestine).
The Mediterranean Sea, which the Romans would eventually call Mare Nostrum, or “our sea,” became the economic and political center of the western world.
Roman society became a spectrum of contrasts from the noble families, called patricians, to the slaves. The city of Rome was a place of great technological complexity (especially hydraulic technology: aqueducts and plumbing), comfort (as seen in the public baths), and grandeur (displayed by the circuses, where sports events were held, the basilicas, the government buildings, and the obelisks). What elements do you see in your city that come from the ancient Romans?
Rome became a cosmopolitan city in which inhabitants from the entire empire converged. Just as English has become the international language today, the same role was played by the Latin of the Romans in its day. Centuries after the fall of Rome, Latin was still being used as the language of scholars by the church as well as by men of letters.  In fact, the Spanish spoken today comes from Latin; thus, every use of Spanish—in speech or writing—harks back to the legacy of the Romans.
Click to play the video for a general view of the history and legacy of Rome:
Click to view video
AgeofAntiquity. (2014, February 23). The Roman Empire – Episode 1: The Rise of the Roman Empire (History Documentary) [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cZx7Rr3iVvc


To learn more about Roman Civilization, we recommend you to read BBC History:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/education/topics/zwmpfg8


Conclusion
As you have seen in this first topic, current society is completely based on the legacy of ancient civilizations, from language to customs. This quick tour is invaluable, raising your awareness of the wealth of history, which you should value as a current, living legacy exhibited around you every day. More than a collection of dates and names, history is important as a record, a copy that interprets facts generated by human experience. It is a legacy that we construct as a society and make ours. In the following topics, you will be able to see clearly how topics, customs, and experiences become more and more familiar as we approach the present.
Checkpoint
Check to see if you can do the following:




Introduction
Have you heard of the Middle Ages? You most likely associate this period with kings, knights, and castles. However, our concept of the Middle Ages is full of errors and based on false stereotypes. We often hear that the Middle Ages was a dark, stagnant period; however, history has begun to change its perspective and to defend the great technical, architectural, and political  accomplishments in this long span of time. We invite you to learn some facts about the Middle Ages that will help you to understand how this period prepared the way for Western society to experience a period of cultural splendor known as the Renaissance, antechamber to the rise of the modern state and the beginning of a new age.
Explanation
2.1 The Middle Ages and the Feudal System
During the reign of Emperor Constantine I (306-337), the Roman Empire abandoned its ancient pagan religion, officially converting to Christianity. From that point on, the culture and political dynamics of the empire began to change dramatically. With the founding of Constantinople, the prominence of Rome as the capital began to decline; eventually, the empire would break into two independent regions, West and East.
The growing pressure from the so-called Barbarians (Germans, Huns, Visigoths, and so on) finally destroyed the Western Roman Empire's stability, bringing it to its end, traditionally marked by the deposition of the last emperor, Romulus Augustulus, on September 4, 476. This date is also considered the beginning of the Middle Ages, a period that began on the ashes of Roman grandeur. Important demographic movements in this period would lead to a new configuration of political geography in Europe. Several factors led to the fall of Western Rome, including invasions by barbarians living in Northern Europe. The following table shows the location of these barbarian ethnic groups.
Table 2.1 Distribution of the Barbarian ethnic groups toward the beginning of the Middle Ages.
The Middle Ages can be more easily studied when divided into two periods: High Middle Ages and Low Middle Ages, based on a series of cultural, economic, and social events that differed greatly from one period to the other. The High Middle Ages could be considered a period of adjustment and territorial redistribution after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, while the Low Middle Ages was a period of feudal and monarchical consolidation in which there were important technological and literary advances.

During the Middle Ages, there were several attempts to recover the order and tradition of ancient Rome. Of the many notable monarchs in this period, there is one who cannot go unmentioned: the famous Charlemagne, who, between the eighth and ninth centuries A.D. succeeded in unifying a great empire including the territories of present-day France, Germany, and the greater area of Northern Italy. The Carolingian Empire formed the foundation of the Holy Roman-German Empire. 
The restructured Holy Empire established itself by unifying numerous villages under the figure of the emperor and allying itself with the Catholic Church for a common identifying element. At the same time in Great Britain, the kingdom of England was forming; in the east, the Byzantine Empire (the eastern Roman Empire) continued; and in Rome, the Catholic Church's pope was rising as a figure of political power, becoming the highest leader of Western Christianity.
In order to understand Medieval Europe, we should discuss not just Christianity and the Catholic kingdoms. We should also discuss the beginning of Islam. At the beginning of the seventh century, a prophet named Muhammad began to spread a set of ideas and beliefs which would eventually become a new religion. Although the new movement originally affected only the Middle East, its influence soon extended throughout the Mediterranean. During the eighth century, Islam reached as far as Spain, when Muslim forces conquered the Visigoth kingdom.

These events marked a crucial change in the commercial and economic dynamics of the Mediterranean, beginning a prolonged period in which Christian Europe was constantly besieged by the threat of Islam. Such was the situation when the Catholic Pope occasionally organized a series of Christian offenses to try to recover Jerusalem and the Holy Land. Now commonly known as the crusades, these raids marked the peak of the pope's political and military power since the Catholic monarchs served as generals answering to the pope.
The Medieval Period also provided the backdrop for the rise of feudalism, the new economic system you must have heard about. Medieval kingdoms and empires still depended on agriculture for their sustenance, but now farmland belonged to a small elite known as feudal lords. Those who lived on the land, on the other hand, were treated as servants and as such had to pay tribute to the feudal lord as they worked the land. The power and wealth of the most important feudal lords created a new elite referred to as nobles. The nobles nominally answered to a monarch but in reality enjoyed great autonomy and liberty. An enlightening example of the feudal political system can be found in medieval France, which will help you to understand how the hereditary monarchy came to be. 

As the Middle Ages entered a second stage, the Low Middle Ages, European monarchs began to gain territory with the nobles and feudal lords. This change was the first faint sign of the origin of the nation-state as the European kingdoms began to unite around a common religion, language, and culture.
The medieval period saw fascinating developments in art and science. In spite of the darkness erroneously associated with the Middle Ages, during this long period, the philosophy of Classical Greece was recovered and preserved.
Great strides were made in technology; for example, in the field of navigation the compass was developed.
In the field of agriculture, the first mechanical mills appeared.
This period also witnessed the development of the first mechanical clocks, a great invention that completely changed the sense of time and organization of the work day.
The military field also demonstrated significant innovations: the use of gunpowder and later appearance of firearms, including canons.
On the subject of architecture, it's essential to mention the rise of Gothic art, the greatest indicator of medieval sophistication. The great cathedrals, castles, and government buildings reveal the energy of the medieval economy and the advanced technology of European Medieval society. One cannot ignore the technological and logistical challenge implicated in building such structures, many of which have survived the passage of time and continue erect, a palpable legacy from their era.
The medieval society also came up against some truly difficult challenges. The most important and deadly challenge was probably the constant epidemic of the Black Death, which tithed the fourteenth-century European population. It's estimated that some twenty-five million Europeans succumbed to the Plague, a third of the total population of the continent. Imagine a pandemic of this magnitude repeated in our current society. The economy would collapse, and society would lose the stability that permits the continuity of civilization as we know it. However, the European society managed to carry on and enter a period of recovery.
As you may suppose, the sicknesses of this time period far outran the advances of medicine, resulting in significant loss of life. One of the last pandemics was caused by the Bubonic Plague in the fifteenth century, which, incidentally, is recognized as the end of the Middle Ages.
After these changes, Europe embarked on a new adventure that would take it to exciting new places and discoveries.
2.2 The Cultural Renaissance
With the arrival of Europeans in America and the development of new scientific theories such as Nicolaus Copernicus's heliocentric model, European society entered an era of great change known as the Renaissance. As its name indicates, this was a time of rethinking philosophical and scientific ideas that deeply transformed European culture and society.
With these advances in thought, a new scientific community emerged that challenged traditional scholastic thinking (a traditional philosophy associated with the Catholic Church). Scholasticism was surpassed by new ideas that would later prepare the way for the scientific revolution, a movement that adopted a new method for the search of knowledge based on experience and observation.
Humanism led man to challenge traditional paradigms and embrace a new anthropocentric worldview, placing man at the center of the universe as a rational, reflective being. The inflexible, monolithic postures of the classical world were questioned and argued. In the Renaissance, man suddenly transferred his faith to science, a field that viewed itself as a solution for the problems of mankind.
In the world of art, the Renaissance movement, breaking with the previous Gothic movement, was reflected in the ideal of human beauty. The new artistic canon was expressed in the work of great artists such as Rafael, Michelangelo, and Leonardo da Vinci. Italian prominence in the world of art extended through the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, preparing for the arrival of the Baroque movement of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The Baroque style, which would extend throughout Europe and the American colonies, was characterized by excessive ornamentation and grandiosity, an approach that would become the main symbol of monarchical splendor in the nation-states.
The Catholic religion would also be challenged by the Protestant Reformation movement, which constituted a serious questioning of traditional dogmatism, which had established the Church as the only source for interpreting the sacred scriptures. Protestants, on the other hand, claimed to defend the right of the people to read and interpret the Bible. Therefore, the Holy Empire found itself virtually divided between the princes who joined the Protestant movement and those who decided to remain with Catholicism.
As new Christian denomination emerged, Europe became divided. The north was predominantly Protestant, including kingdoms such as Denmark, Norway, Switzerland, and England. The south, on the other hand, was mostly Catholic, including monarchies such as Spain, Italy, France, and Austria.
The new religious system was soon marked by war and political change. The fight for power between the two groups ending up completely changing the map of Europe. In 1618, the religious differences between the princes of the Holy Empire turned into a military confrontation, beginning the Thirty Years' War. This contest reached a continental scale, ending with the Peace of Westphalia of 1648. The new borders resulting from the conflict prepared the way for the consolidation of the nation-state, a new political unit composed of a government (generally monarchy), a territory with well-marked borders, and a population with common cultural elements, such as religion and language.
As you will have noticed, the Renaissance was a period of accelerated change in all areas of human development. This period was significant for the challenge and change of paradigms, the reconsideration of human understanding, and the consolidation of European monarchies as leaders on the international scene. Europe thus proceeded toward modernity and the rise of the nation-state.
2.3 The Age of National Monarchies
Click to view video
BBC Two. (2008). Versailles, The Dream of a King. 1 of 3 in HD. [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLgt5Zfq-UI


Do you know of any countries that are currently ruled by a type of government like an absolute monarchy? Remember that in this type of government the king rules as he wishes. He is not bound by any law or constitution.
So, after the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, European politics headed toward the consolidation of the European nation-state. But what does that mean? It refers to the demarcation of a territory under the command of a ruler, as you observe in your country. Remember that in the Middle Ages, the prevailing concept was that of feudalism; the concept of territorial borders did not exist. It is believed that the one who led the way in this system was France under the reign of Louis XIV, who ruled from 1643-1715. The new model of absolute monarchy focused on the principle of centralization and on dismantling the last surviving structures of feudalism. To accomplish these objectives, the regime of Louis XIV concentrated on abolishing the remaining powers of the nobles, converting this sector of the population into a decorative element of the court of Versailles. In addition, during his reign, Louis XIV used science as a strategic ally, promoting its dissemination as a tool for pursuing the interests of the state.
This model of monarchy, as you can see in the video, was copied in Spain when Philip V, the grandson of Louis XIV, came to the throne. After his victory in the War of Spanish Succession (a conflict arising upon the death of Charles II of Spain, who had no direct heir), Philip V, who ruled from 1700 to 1724 and from 1724 to 1746, adopted the state policies promoted by his grandfather in France. With this model, he hoped to centralize the monarchy in Spain, reform tax collection, and supply the various regions of Spain with shared laws. In support of these goals, the new monarch promoted Castilian Spanish.
Likewise, this new form of government spread to the Spanish colonies in America during the reign of Charles III (king from 1759 to 1788). The new system of the modern state recast the relationship between Spain and its colonies, permitting the success of a new economic model. Mercantilism promoted commerce and the accumulation of precious metals in order to achieve a favorable balance of trade.
In turn, three factors laid the foundation for consolidating England as a nation-state: the establishment of an Anglican Church independent of the Catholic Church, the merging of crowns through strategic marriages (uniting England and Scotland in 1603), and the importance of parliament as a bridge between the monarchy and the people. The success of this system in England was exceptional because of several situations particular to this country: its isolation, its unusual climate, and the influence of many different ethnic groups throughout its history.
As you can see, the transition to a nation-state depends on three factors: the transformation of the political system, the progress of the society, and the emergence of shared cultural elements providing identify and unity. Most modern countries follow this system. Do you think your country has gone through this process?
Conclusion
This topic has given you a quick tour of the transformation of Western society, from the fall of Rome until the consolidation of the nation-state. As you have seen, these historical changes resulted from the convergence of economic, social and political factors; that is, the combination of human actions and events helps to form our experience and legacy as a civilization.
The Middle Ages was in reality a period of great change and advances; it was the backdrop for the transformation of human society, the appearance and disappearance of kingdoms and empires. In addition, this period produced people who have left an extremely important legacy in the areas of knowledge and technology.
In spite of the fact that we have gone through more than a thousand years in just one topic, it's crucial that you understand the complexity and extent of the transformations experienced in this period, from feudalism to mercantilism, from peasants to citizens of the nation-state, and from religious dogmatism to the scientific spirit. The combination of knowledge, effort, and chance that make up our experience become the object of study of history, a versatile discipline that invites you to reflect on our present through the events of the past. 
Checkpoint
Check to see if you can do the following:


Introduction
Do you like science? In one way or another, humans have always made significant achievements. In one period of history, a revolution in thought gave place to great advances in science. Do you know in what century these developments became notable? Do you know which scientists lived in that period? Through this topic, you will have the opportunity to learn about the details that gave place to this transformation in thinking, setting the standard for science as we know it. But you will also have the opportunity to recognize how this model of thinking gave place to new ideas about forms of government and the value currently given to the people that make up a nation.
Explanation
3.1 The Revolution in Science and European Thought
What do you think science means? This discipline is always portrayed as cold, rigid, and imitative. However, like all other human activities, science is not completely objective and is subject to change and modernization. In the seventeenth century, the scientific revolution effected a profound change in the concept of knowledge and the method for obtaining it.
The scientific method, developed in the seventeenth century, was based on empiricism; that is, on what we perceive through our senses. But in order for knowledge to be considered as such, it should have at least two characteristics. In the first place, it should be reproducible; that is, it should be possible to repeat the experiment in different contexts. In the second place, it should be verifiable or falsifiable; that is, one should be able to prove that it is true or false. This last stipulation ultimately determines that every fact should be the object of debate.
Under these premises, the scientists of the period made gigantic strides in the development of human knowledge. The following table shows some of their contributions.
Table 3.1  Contributions of Scientists

Johannes Kepler

Galileo Galilei

Isaac Newton

Robert Boyle
As we told you in the introduction to the topic, the scientific revolution served as the antechamber for the rise of the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century. The era that would become known by the nickname “century of lights” was characterized by the rise of the new science as well as new currents of thought in practically all areas of human experience.
The spirit of the Enlightenment attempted to make scientific knowledge beneficial to the general public. Once there had been a crucial step forward in our understanding of nature, it was time to apply this innovation for progress and development. Throughout Europe, kings began to patronize science as a new ally in the pursuit of the economic and political interests of the state.
King Charles III of Spain (1734-1759) was one of the principal exponents of enlightened despotism.
Image retrieved from  http://www.biografiasyvidas.com/biografia/c/carlos_iii.htm, for educational purposes only.
The most important monarchs, who became interested in the new ideas and based their reigns on the principles of the Enlightenment, adopted a new model of absolutism now commonly referred to as enlightened despotism. The word despotism alludes to the fact that they did not allow their populace to intervene or give an opinion on their government policy. The word enlightened, as was mentioned, refers to their interest in learning the new ideas and advances of the day. Among others, the following monarchs were characterized by using reason as the basis for state decisions and by assessing national well-being on a societal basis:

King Charles III
(r. 1759-1788)
in Spain

Emperor Joseph II
(r. 1765-1790)
in the Holy Roman Empire

Czar Catherine II
(r. 1762-1796)
in Russia

King Frederick II
(the Great; r. 1740-1786)
in Prussia
The monarchs' enthusiasm and appreciation for science contributed to the rise of new societies, academies, and universities. Under this institutional model, the scientific elite enjoyed an accelerated process of research and its dissemination: new journals, circulars, and newspapers appeared. This change permitted new ideas and theories to be published quickly. Their publication, in turn, led to the proliferation of research and publication. This energetic search for knowledge produced many new developments, of which the following are the most outstanding:
Table 3.2 Scientists of the Period and Their Contributions
Click to view video
Fault of the Stars (2015, November 8). The French Revolution History Channel HD. [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5pXxoyk5wOo


Antoine de Lavoisier
Carolus Linnaeus
David Hume
Rousseau and Montesquieu
So many changes and so much new information brought the masses to a turning point in their mentality. As you will see in the next section, little by little, the different people groups began to wake up from a long political lethargy and speak out in the face of absolutism. This situation initiated a series of revolutionary movements that would deeply transform the concept of state and the social organization of Europe and America.
3.2 The French Revolution and the New Sociopolitical Age in Europe
Would you agree that France is currently a First-World country? The truth is, incredible though it may seem, in eighteenth-century France, there was poverty and misery. Life was very difficult for the peasants and workers in France; the lack of hygiene in the towns, the scarcity of food and the nonexistence of workers' rights produced a dismal scene. The difference between the classes was extreme: while the peasants fought to survive, the nobles and high clergy enjoyed numerous privileges. They did not have any taxes and lived surrounded by luxury, comfort, and excesses.
Frustrated by social injustice and inspired by new political aspirations of the period, an angry mob of workers and peasants unleashed a violent movement on July 14, 1789 when they stormed the Bastille, a prison in Paris. While King Luis XVI and his wife Marie Antoinette rested in the luxurious Palace of Versailles, the Parisians had begun a revolution that would forever transform the government of France, and eventually the rest of Europe.
The violent nature of the revolution brought about dramatic social change. The lower classes, blinded by their frustration with constant poverty and hunger, hunted down and in many cases killed the nobles and clergy. Imagine the scenario: from a desire to right a situation of social injustice, France fell into extreme violence. Do you know the result of this riot? With the execution of King Luis XVI and Queen Marie Antoinette by guillotine. This event, in turn, immediately unleashed a fear of “the light of the Enlightenment” in other European courts. European kings feared that their countries' inhabitants would revolt against them, following the example of the French. The era of enlightened despotism had come to a sudden end.
The revolution called for a complete break with the past, an intolerant and dangerous resolution expressed by useless acts, such as adopting a new calendar, or violence, such as attacking the Catholic religion. The most extreme revolutionaries named the worship of reason as the new state ideology. France was headed toward a genocidal period called the “Reign of Terror,” under which any Frenchman who openly disagreed with the revolution was killed.
You might think that peace and order would follow a revolution of such magnitude, but that was not the case. After the abolition of the monarchy, France suffered under a series of unstable, erratic republican governments which are briefly described below: 
In society, the noblest accomplishment of the French Revolution was the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, a document that marks a before and after in the personal story of man and his dignity. This change probably doesn't seem very significant to you since you live in a time when human rights are recognized, at least as dictated by the law. However, for many, many years, human beings and their rights were not normally valued as you expect them to be in today's society.
Finally, society had expressed the natural rights of man and begun to recognize his need for a government that would guarantee the timely observance of these prerogatives for its citizens. The French Revolution also brought to light the importance of the ideal of universal suffrage, that is, the right to vote. Human beings have the right as citizens to elect their rulers.
As you can see, the importance of the French Revolution lies in the re-evaluation of the relationship between the state and the general populace. This event was the first step in the transformation from subject to citizen, a politically active person with the right to vote. For example, according to the law, we are all recognized as citizens, not subjects. Those are two different things, aren't they? Thanks to this difference, Mexicans enjoy a representative democracy, and all citizens eighteen years old or older have the right to elect their leaders. This right is mainly owing to the revolutionaries who, at the end of the eighteenth century, dared to question the order of the age to demand a more just and fair society.
3.3 US Independence
With the arrival of the ideas of the French Revolution to America, this continent also became the scene of deep political changes. The constant flux of the ideas of the Enlightenment began to generate a new consciousness and a sense of American identity that would later manifest itself in an independence movement. The first experience of this type in the New World was on the Atlantic North American coast, where Great Britain had thirteen colonies.
The driving force of the American Revolution was the irritation colonists voiced over the constant taxes that were imposed by the British parliament. As you know, all the economically active inhabitants of a country should pay taxes, but we do it for the benefit of our country. The North Americans were frustrated because they came to the conclusion that the London parliament had no right to impose taxes on them since the Americans were not represented in this legislative body. From this premise, one of the main slogans of the Revolution arose: “No taxation without representation.”
To know more about (English) colonies in U.S. review the following video carefully http://ed.ted.com/on/lOrzfPGq and answer the questions that are at the end of it.


At the beginning of the 1770s, a series of political and military figures, such as George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Benjamin Franklin, began to surface as leaders of the movement, eventually initiating an open rebellion that would turn violent against the British authorities and British army. The rebellion took a decisive turn when, on July 4, 1776, delegates sent by twelve of the colonies approved the Declaration of Independence of the United States of America, a new country completely independent of Great Britain.
But the British were not ready to give up their rich colonies. Thus there began a war that would last several years. Skillful diplomacy allowed the Americans to win allies in France, Spain, and Holland, giving them the military upper hand and leading them to triumph with the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783, through which Great Britain officially recognized the independence of the United States of America.
As a citizen of a democratic country, you can imagine the importance of this great accomplishment. The Americans finally agreed on their political system, granting state functions such as tax collection and legislation. The United States of America would become a pioneer society in concepts such as suffrage and representation, pillars of the modern concept of democratic government.
Conclusion
In this topic, you have learned about the triumph of science and democracy as principal traits of modern times. As you well know, the appreciation of science and democracy are columns of Western civilization, values that became popular in the eighteenth century with the great revolutionary movements, from the Enlightenment to the French Revolution. An understanding of this period ensures a better understanding of our social, political, and economic reality.
But as you'll see in the following topics, Western civilization would still have to pass through other periods of revolution and conflict to acquire its current structure. All of the interesting historical facts and stories that follow will allow you to reflect on the complexity of human experience, as well as learning the importance of its study and interpretation.
Checkpoint
Check to see if you can do the following:




Introduction
This topic in particular should be especially familiar to you. As citizens of a Latin American country, we have a good notion of the conditions and events that brought about the independence of the Spanish viceroyalties and provinces in America at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Nevertheless, in this explanation, you are invited to challenge your beliefs and supposed knowledge on this particular topic in order to make a critical analysis of actual circumstances that brought about this rift: its causes, but also its consequences, its benefits, but also its disadvantages.
Explanation
4.1 Background and Causes of Independence Movements in Latin America
Beginning in the first half of the sixteenth century, Spain occupied and colonized large territories of continental America. There a society began to form that was completely different from that on the Iberian Peninsula. The unique weather conditions, the vast geography, and the presence of varied ethnic groups characterized the development of an exceptional colonial society.
Toward the end of the seventeenth century, the viceroyalties of New Spain (now Mexico) and Peru had reached surprising political and social maturity and had developed several Creole institutions and customs that were practically autonomous. That is, the colonies were somewhat free from Spain's rule, developing their own institutions. However, they still answered to the crown and kept up a nominal appearance of loyalty to the Spanish monarchy. This system permitted widespread corruption. The viceroys and other politicians sent less money and metal than what they had actually collected in taxes and mining. The reduced income from the colonies led the Spanish empire to suffer a financial crisis which reached its climax under Charles II (r. 1665-1700), the last of the Austrian monarchs in Spain. You can easily deduce one of the factors which facilitated this type of corruption: the colonies' distance from the mother country. Remember that the only means of transportation at the time was by boat. Under favorable conditions, the ships took approximately forty days to convey information from one side of the Atlantic to the other. Thus, Spain's control over the colonies was severely limited.
As you learned in one of the previous topics, with the death of Charles II, the male line of the Austrians came to an end. In the absence of a direct descendent, the throne was passed to the deceased monarch's great-nephew, Philip V, Duc d’Anjou. The new king was the grandson of Louis XIV of the House of Bourbon, king of France. With the ascension of the Bourbons, the relationship between Spain (the empire's capital) and its American kingdoms took a new direction.  Near the mid-eighteenth century, these territories were first referred to by the term colonies.
Can you imagine living in this period of Mexico’s history? We have some fairly reliable sources on life in this time. The first Mexican newspaper, the Mexican Gazette, was published in 1722. This newspaper might tell us that in 1767, the Jesuits were forced out of New Spain. Why do you think this religious order would pose a threat to Spain? The Bourbons began a policy, commonly known as the Bourbon Reforms, through which the monarchs attempted to reduce corruption and increase their control over the American colonies. These reforms changed territorial boundaries and regulated tax collection, changes which were necessary for the empire and disastrous for the Creoles. With these changes, the Creoles lost much of the position, power, and privilege which they had worked to build in the preceding centuries.
The Creoles began to feel their power slipping out of their hands with the arrival of a new elite from the Peninsula toward the second half of the eighteenth century. As part of the reforms, these officials occupied the most important positions in the new government system, academic institutions, the military, and even the church. In other words, the Bourbon dynasty didn't trust children of Spaniards born in America with matters of civil service. In their place, the monarchs sent Spaniards who would identify themselves completely with the mother country and defend the interests of the Crown. This policy led to rivalry between the Creoles and the gachupines (the term used to refer to Spaniards born in Europe). The Creoles sought to defend themselves, asserting their rights and legal qualifications before a government that clearly favored Peninsula-born Spaniards.
Far to the contrary of what you have probably heard, there was never a strict caste system in America.  Actually, it was the norm for the European and native groups to mingle and intermarry in the Spanish-American populations. Although they were obviously aware of this situation, the Creoles made up a caste rhetoric to give the appearance of racial purity. The Creoles hoped to associate themselves with their European ancestors while at the same time distancing themselves from the indigenous groups, the African Americans, and the descendants of interracial marriage who populated the Spanish-American cities.
Historians have commonly confused this rhetoric, which is also represented in the video, with the practical reality of a system of racial differentiation. However, sources from the period have shown that colonial society was a broad field of contrasts and peculiarities, with exclusive and deceitful ranking. In an age when there was no knowledge of genetics and insufficient genealogical records, it was impossible to maintain a system of castes. The population could not be labeled according to the elaborate categories gathered by the artistic genre of casta painting.  You must understand Spanish-American society in order to fathom the importance of the rivalry between the Creoles and Europeans. This social rift was significant because it would eventually lead to separatist feelings. 
The Bourbon Reforms and the distinction between Americans and Europeans were the main internal factors that eventually led to the breakout of the independence movements.
But a complete analysis of the situation must also recognize the external factors that made the Creoles wish for independence:
Toward the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth centuries, a series of events broke out that would bring an abrupt end to Bourbon reign and policy. These events would decidedly aid the American colonies in gaining their independence:
Imagine you are one of the Creoles living in this period. You are frustrated by the lack of political opportunities and inspired by the revolutionary movements. You would certainly have thought that it was time to rise up and take advantage of the break with the status quo in Spain. Thus it was that between 1809 and 1811 a series of rebel movements began to spring up throughout Spanish America. The following table gives the leaders of these movements according to the areas they liberated:
Table 4.1 Liberators of Latin America
On the other hand, what was the situation in Spain during this time that contributed to the success of the independence movement in New Spain? In reality, the capital of the Spanish empire was worn out and broken by war with Napoleon. Thus, Spain proved incapable of directing a defensive front against the insurrection in America. Near 1820, Spain had practically lost control of all its colonies on the continent, except for Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Santo Domingo (now the Dominican Republic). Spain initially refused to recognize the loss of this vast territory. However, by the fourth decade of the nineteenth century, Spain had begun to establish diplomatic relations with its former colonies, which by that time had become independent republics.
Consider the case of New Spain. Born in 1800, it would be celebrating ten years of existence when its independence movement began and twenty-one years when the movement ended, resulting in the country of Mexico. It would then go through a monarchy, a federal republic, a centralist republic, the first French invasion, and war with the United States. Finally, well into the 60s, it would witness the second French intervention and the rise of Maximilian’s Empire.
4.2 New Nations, Sociopolitical Structures, and Territorial Redistribution in Latin American Countries
With their recently achieved independence, the new Spanish-American leaders now faced a big problem: choosing the best form of government for the new Latin American countries. Faced with a multitude of proposals and a lack of general assent, the new countries tried to establish monarchies, federal republics, centralist republics, and confederations.
Mexico had the following types of government:
While independence provided great opportunities for the Americans to organize their territories as they wished, it also left a political vacuum which became evident with the instability experienced in nineteenth-century Latin America. In this period, Latin America was marked by the lack of a common identity and national unity as well as the absence of agreement on political policy. Lacking these requirements for stability, the Latin American territories suffered a period of chaos and internal rebellions. This difficult political situation favored foreign invasions and war between neighboring territories. In spite of Simón Bolívar's vision of a united America, the former Spanish empire in America ended up breaking into numerous republics. The distribution of territory and the formation of new identities was a rough and tortuous task.
At some point, you have probably asked yourself why the United States was able to gain independence in a relatively short time. But more importantly, you may have wondered why this new nation managed to become consolidated in such a short time while Latin America suffered many years of political instability and foreign invasion. The disadvantages of Latin America can be summarized as follows:
Details of the viceroyalty of New Spain and New Granada:

On the other hand, the former Portuguese viceroyalty of Brazil, now an independent empire, achieved a leading role in the region. This new empire waged war on its neighbors, considerably extending its borders. A particularly noteworthy example of Brazil's military prowess is the War of the Triple Alliance (1864-1870), in which Brazil formed an alliance with Argentina and Uruguay against Paraguay. The result of the conflict was devastating for Paraguay, which lost not only the rich and extensive Chaco region, but also at least one third of its population.
Can you imagine living in the midst of this instability? Many people were born under the colonial regime and grew up in the midst of rebel uprisings. Then, after the emancipation, they witnessed the overthrow of their new country's government on numerous occasions.
Latin America had entered the concert of independent nations, but in order to develop, it had to first find a new identity, unite its people under new symbols and ideals, and establish a stable form of government. These tasks all turned out to be difficult, costing many lives. However, the legacy of this struggle has shown itself to be valuable and positive, providing the Latin American people with their desired liberty and the right to determine their destiny.
4.3 The Political and Economic Influence of the United States and Its Relationship with Latin America
As was mentioned in the previous topic, the United States achieved independence by 1783. In 1787, the new country adopted the model of the federal republic under a president and entered a period of extraordinary political and social stability. This stability allowed the US to grow economically and develop a strong army. The success of the country of the stars and stripes is reflected in the leadership role it would project to the rest of the continent following the independence of Latin America.
In 1823, the Monroe Doctrine was signed, espousing the maxim “America for the Americans.” This maxim effectively announced the active role the United States would maintain in Latin America from that point on. With this principle, a well-organized army, and skillful diplomacy, the US assumed an active, interventionist role which would become evident on many occasions.
Click play on the following video to visualize the United States' political expansionism. As the video begins, it displays this self-description: “Between 1776 and 1887, the United States seized over 1.5 billion acres from America’s indigenous people by treaty and executive order. The Invasion of America shows how by mapping every treaty and executive order during that period. It concludes with a map of present-day federal Indian reservations.”
The main goals of the US were the following: to make every trace of European influence in America disappear, to gain permanent allies, and establish favorable markets for its products. To achieve these goals the United States did not hesitate to intervene diplomatically and militarily in Latin America to defend its self-assumed position as a world power. Probably because of its proximity, Mexico suffered the worst consequences of US political interventionism, losing more than half its territory following the war of 1846-48.  We are generally taught that one or more politicians, mainly Antonio de Santa Anna, should be held exclusively responsible for this event. However, this loss was in reality the result of the lack of unity among Mexicans, political instability, and the ambition of the neighbor to the north.
To learn more about the processes of colonization in Latin America, we recommend you watch the followings videos:
Click to view video
Diamond, J./National Geographic. (2005). Guns, Germs, and Steel. Retrieved from  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ojU31yHDqiM
 






































Conclusion
As you will have realized, the eighteenth century was a crucial period for the territories from California to the Patagonia for several reasons. First, the Creole population (the children of Europeans born in America) developed a sense of patriotism. Second, they witnessed the replacement of the Spanish dynasty (from the Austrians to the Bourbons). Finally, the changing international scene would make way for one of the most important political breaches in world history. This rift would mark the end of an era that had spanned three centuries.
Do you know why this crucial, controversial incident in our history is of value to you? This incident provides the basis for valuing your role as citizen. You can now recognize the arduous sequence of conflicts that had to be waged, the lives that had to be lost, and the agreements that had to be signed in order for a new nation to be established. Latin America passed through a deep and painful transformation to become free and independent nations.
If you understand this period in all its complexity—the causes and results of independence and the search for a national identity—you will be better prepared to reflect on your condition as a Mexican. You most likely have already reexamined the importance of history for society, recognizing history as the provider of narratives and experiences to construct our identity.
Checkpoint
Check to see if you can do the following:
Introduction
The nineteenth century was a time of significant events and technological advances. The Industrial Revolution, which had begun in Great Britain at the end of the previous century, began to spread to other countries and inspire the accelerated production of sophisticated technology. The use of steam power created favorable conditions for the birth of the railway, permitting the transportation of products and passengers at a much greater speed. At the same time, society changed dramatically, forming two main divisions: the class in trade and the proletariat, or wage earners. Nobility shifted to the background, while economic capacity and the accumulation of capital became the new vehicles of prestige in society.
In the field of geopolitics, the nineteenth century served as a frame for the rise of nationalism, the ultimate expression of the nation-state as a political entity. Nationalism favored the unification of both Italy and Germany in the 1870s. Nationalism also provided the greatest impulse for the beginning of a new era of imperialism in which the main European powers would colonize Africa, Asia, and Oceania.
As you can see, numerous conflicts, social movements, technological innovations, and changes in everyday life make the nineteenth century one of the most fascinating periods to study. Analyzing the facts presented to you in this topic, you should be able to identify the customs and inventions still in use today which originated in the nineteenth century.
Explanation
5.1 The Napoleonic Invasions and the Transformation of Europe
Do you remember how the French Revolution began in 1789? As was mentioned earlier, with the triumph of the revolution, France entered a violent and difficult period. Well, in 1799, a general named Napoleon Bonaparte led a coupe d´etate for the revolutionary French government known as the “Directory.” He then established himself in power under the title of the first consul. Napoleon's military ability and revolutionary ideology—the separation of church and state, labor rights and private property, among others—eventually provoked a reaction among the other European powers. They deployed their armies, leading to an extended period of European war which would deeply change the political map on the continent.
With war all around his borders, Napoleon crowned himself emperor in 1804, beginning a period now commonly known as the First French Empire.  In the following years, the new emperor would undertake an ambitious expansionist project that would give France more territory than ever before. And, if that were not enough, he would venture to place his siblings on the thrones of other European countries.
Thus it was that a family of humble origin became a powerful new dynasty with Napoleon on the imperial throne in France and his siblings in proud possession of the following crowns:
Joseph Bonaparte----> Spain
Jérȏme Bonaparte-->Westphalia
Louis Bonaparte----> Holand
Elisa Bonaparte---->Tuscany
The traditional European dynasties, such as the Bourbons in Spain and France, the Habsburgs in Austria, the Hanovers in Great Britain, the Romanovs in Russia, and the Hohenzollern in Prussia joined ranks. That is, they united to reverse the influence of the French Revolution and the political aspirations of the Bonapartes.
Although Napoleon´s government could be described as dictatorial, the grounds for his rule were deeply influenced by the revolutionary ideals laid out in the Napoleonic Code. This innovative document was a major step in the development of modern law. The Code included regulations for the following areas:
Providing an example of the Bonapartes' revolutionary ideology, the French Empire style of decoration sought to break with the outrageously ostentatious Late Baroque style preferred by Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette. This reaction was especially noticeable in the style of dress: while the aristocrats of the old regime used large, richly decorated garments, the new fashions adopted simplicity and straight lines.
Napoleon was a military genius, and he built a monumental diplomatic machine through alliances and a ring of satellite states. However, by 1812, it appeared that the Coalition forces would win the war, with Great Britain becoming the new power on the continent. In 1814, the triumphant Coalition forces marched into Paris. Napoleon abdicated and was exiled on the Mediterranean island of Elba. The victorious powers then held the Vienna Congress to plan the restoration of pre-war Europe. In an attempt to vindicate the old regime, the first natural step was to restore the Bourbons in France in the person of Louis XVIII.
But Napoleon was not yet ready to renounce his political ambitions. In 1815, he escaped from the island of Elba, returned to France, and assembled a makeshift army with which he resumed his empire for a period commonly known as the Hundred Days. This short-lived adventure came to an end at the Battle of Waterloo, where Napoleon lost not just the battle but his popularity. He then returned to Paris, abdicated once more, and was finally exiled to a small remote island called St. Helena, in the South Atlantic Ocean.
Although the Coalition won, the years of war and conflict marked European's social life and political goals. The collective mentality of Europe was forever changed. The old regime's ideological foundation of unequal relations between sovereign and subject were destroyed. We can thus conclude that the Napoleonic Wars were essentially an ideological conflict between two different concepts of the state and the role of traditions and the church in European politics.
To learn more about The Napoleonic Invasions, we recommend you to read BBC History:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/empire_seapower/ and then play the following animated map
http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/interactive/animations/trafalgar/index_embed.shtml




5.2 Nineteenth-Century Bourgeois Revolutions
Click to view video
 






With the final defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte in 1815, Louis XVIII reclaimed his throne in France. Meanwhile, in the rest of Europe, the borders were redrawn in an attempt to restore the old order, and Great Britain established itself as the new world power. Under pressure from Napoleon, the Habsburgs had abolished the millennial Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, forming in its place the Austrian Empire. This new system permanently divided the Germans into two large spheres:  Protestant Prussia to the north and Catholic Austria to the south.
Europe at the time of the Congress of Vienna was called Restoration Europe because, in the eyes of the nobles and royalty, the old order was finally restored. They believed that Napoleon's revolutionary changes had been annulled. However, they could not have been more mistaken. Democratic ideals and aspirations had been printed on the minds of the masses. European commoners were no longer willing to accept absolutism in their government.
In France, the Bourbon regime faced a crisis in 1830, when public protests and opposition forced Carlos X (successor to Louis XVIII) to abdicate. His absolute rule was at odds with the social and economic reality of nineteenth-century France. His cousin Louis-Philippe, Duke d'Orléans, took advantage of the situation. In the middle of the chaos, he crowned himself king of France, proposing a new model of constitutional monarchy, in which he played the role of citizen-king. The model proposed by Louis-Philippe offered a moderate solution, maintaining the form of the old regime while integrating the democratic rhetoric of the new revolutionary tendencies.
But the Orleanist model proved insufficient to meet the demands of the masses, The revolutionary ideals of liberty and democracy continued to circulate throughout Europe.  Intellectual circles plotted and conspired to instigate new revolutions. In the year 1848, a new wave of liberal bourgeois rebellion broke out. These  insurrections brought about the fall of several monarchies and forced others to abandon absolute rule. These changes prepared the way for a new era of modern nationalism in Europe.
Many factors contributed to the widespread outbreak of revolution in 1848. You should remember that the industrial revolution continued to change daily life with numerous technological innovations. Methods of production had also changed. Society began a slow but steady process of urbanization. Liberal political ideas spread rapidly in newspapers and pamphlets. In their desire for liberty, the working classes constantly made more demands, sparked more rebellion, and broke out in more violence.
The results of the revolutions of 1848 can be summarized as follows:
In France, Louis-Philippe's regime collapsed. The German populace demanded that the states become a nation with a new democratic government. In the Habsburg Empire, numerous ethnic movements demanded more independence in a clear display of nationalism. And in Poland, movements arose against Prussian control. Although these revolutions were quickly quelled by the aristocracy, their effect on society and politics was felt for the rest of the century. This was the period in which nationalism was born.
5.3 The Age of Nationalism and National Integration
The second half of the nineteenth century was a period of extraordinary creativity. It is to this period that we owe a great deal of the traditions and technology still popular today. For example, the use of a white dress for the marriage ceremony and Christmas trees began in Victorian Great Britain. The Victorian period, spanning the reign of Queen Victoria, stretched from 1837 to 1901.
The period that you see represented on the video was also the Railway Age, a period in which countless tracks were laid to connect cities and countries. Likewise, the practical applications of electricity were explored: Thomas Alva Edison patented the first electric light bulb around 1880. Can you imagine a world without artificial lighting? At the beginning of the nineteenth century, most cities were still without a public lighting system.
These technological advances made considerable changes in daily life. Artificial lighting alone allowed people to participate in productive activities or recreation after dusk. In addition, artificial lighting helped to reduce night crime. In the area of transportation, not only the railroad, but also the steam engine played a key role in a new era of exploration anticipating European colonization in Africa, Asia, and Oceania. Near the end of the century, the use of steam prepared the way for the internal-combustion engine, an innovation that would further facilitate mobility and pave the road for the development of the automobile so widely used today.
On the subject of politics, this was the era of nationalism. It is called the era of nationalism because the European populations aspired to form their own state, with a language, religion, government, and legislation. The concept of a multi-nation empire survived only in Russia and Austria. The case of Austria provides a particularly enlightening example because, in 1867, it had to respond to the constant demands of the Hungarians for independence. A compromise was finally reached in which a dual monarchy was established. From this agreement, the Austro-Hungarian Empire (or simply Austria-Hungary) emerged, and the Habsburg monarch became both emperor of Austria and king of Hungary.
Nevertheless, many other nations still did not enjoy representation or a satisfactory level of autonomy. For instance, in the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, people of many nationalities lived side by side: among others, Czechs, Slovakians, Hungarians, Germans, Austrians, Serbians, Italians, Bosnians, and Croatians. In the era of awakening nationalism, the fragile system of Austria-Hungary would prove not to be feasible, as you will see in subsequent topics.
This same nationalist impulse was what brought about the unification of both Italy and Germany. For centuries, these two nations had remained divided in various kingdoms, princedoms, and duchies without any sense of interdependence.
In Italy, the House of Savoy, of the Piedmont-Sardinia kingdom, took the lead. Around this local dynasty, nationalist Italians began to gather. Near 1859, the extremely rapid process of conquest and assimilation began with the contingent princedoms. With leaders such as Mazzini, Garibaldi, and Cavour, the Savoy's cause triumphed dramatically. In just three years, they conquered much of the Lombardy-Venetia kingdom and the duchy of Modena (House of Habsburg), the duchy of Parma, the Kingdom of two Sicilies (House of Bourbon), and finally, the Papal States, which were governed by the Catholic pope, whose seat was in Rome.
In 1861, King Victor Emmanuel II of Savoy was proclaimed king of Italy with his interim capital in Turin.
They had yet to conquer Rome, which remained in the power of the Catholic pope. But this conquest would be a delicate issue, since they would be risking the wrath of millions of Catholics around the world who supported their spiritual leader. It wasn't until 1870 that the forces of Garibaldi finally succeeded in taking Rome and completing the unification of Italy. Pope Pius IX decided to lock himself in the Vatican, refusing to recognize the loss of his territories.
German unification was accomplished based on an agreement between the princes. With the establishment of the Austrian Empire and the advances of the Italians, Germany was flooded by a general feeling of nationalism and the desire to be united. In 1867, the German princes proclaimed the establishment of the German Confederation of the North. Shortly thereafter, they entered into war with France under Napoleon III.  German victory over the forces of this monarch spurred the national feeling even more. In 1871, Minister Otto von Bismarck of Prussia proclaimed the establishment of the German Empire with the king of Prussia, Wilhelm I, as Emperor. This action did not imply the automatic removal of the other princes. It simply recognized his title, establishing an empire composed of four kingdoms (Prussia, Bavaria, Saxony, and Württemberg), six large duchies, five duchies, seven princedoms, three free cities, and an imperial territory.
Conclusion
As you've seen, the nineteenth century was marked by three significant phenomena: the Napoleonic Wars, the Revolutions of 1848, and the rise of nationalism. These events were paralleled by advances in technology which transformed society in matters of everyday life. Technology facilitated the rise of cities, as well as providing new means of communication and transportation.
We hope you that you find this topic particularly interesting. Remember that it was in this century that Mexico fought a difficult battle to become an independent nation. Finally, this period witnessed, on a global level, the development of numerous cultural practices that continue to shape our style of life in western civilization.
Checkpoint
Check to see if you can do the following:
Introduction
Just as our country was a colony of the Spanish Empire for an extended period of three hundred years (1521-1821), many other countries have a similar history. Numerous territories in Africa, Asia, and Oceania depended on European imperialist powers politically and economically during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. This new period of colonialism stands out because of the exponential growth of the main European powers. The powers that are most noteworthy, because of their size and military power, are Great Britain, France, and Germany.
In this topic, you will learn the background and causes of this new era of imperialism. You will visualize the situation of the colonies and how they developed. And you will understand the clash of interests among the world powers. The most important developments, for you to associate with this period, are the consolidation of the capitalist world economy and the appearance of the first symptoms of the conflicts that would break out into World War I.
Explanation
6.1 Characteristics of Imperialism and the Strengthening of Capitalism
We will define imperialism as the phenomenon by which a country with great economic, military, and logistic capacity ventures to occupy and conquer territories outside of its historical context. Imperialism is a fundamentally unequal relationship, in which a more advanced society invades, occupies, and exploits the resources of an external territory without consulting the local society.
In the previous module, we told you about the most important conditions that brought Europe to this new age of imperialism. Among these conditions, you should remember the rise of nationalism and the unification of Italy and Germany. Another condition was the success of the Industrial Revolution and the technological advances it inspired. Furthermore, Europe went through a period of militarization in which the main powers invested huge sums into developing, equipping, and organizing their armies.
When industrial capitalism reached maturity, production began to exceed demand in the European states. It became obvious that new markets must be found to export the excess product. In addition, mass production demanded raw materials and resources that were limited and costly in Europe. Therefore, continued production would require Europe to exploit the wealth of other territories.
As far as logistics, the import of resources and export of goods required ports and regular settlements along the trade routes. The steam ships needed to stop to replenish its stock of fuel (coal) and other provisions. With these limitations on their continued growth, the most powerful European nations developed a strong desire to occupy vast, rich territories. With these new territories, they hoped to expand their economic capacity while also bolstering their reputation with other countries.
There were other countries besides Great Britain, France, and Germany that experienced a process of expansionism and imperialism near the end of the nineteenth century and throughout the twentieth century. Russia, Japan, and the United States also enjoyed a period of accelerated growth which would later move them to look for new territories and favorable trade relations.
6.2 Neocolonial Empires
Now that you understand the factors that drew the European powers into a new wave of imperialism, we invite you on a tour of the main events of this period. To begin this tour, we should first observe a process now known as the Scramble for Africa. This term comprises a series of conferences, conventions, and diplomatic agreements carried out in the 1880s by Germany, Belgium, Spain, France, Italy, Portugal, and the United Kingdom. The result of these talks was that practically the entire African continent was considered the domain of the European powers, with the exception of Liberia and Ethiopia. From these agreements of diplomatic talks, the principle of effective occupation emerged. Effective occupation recognized a region as the domain of a specific country if that country could show that it had occupied, controlled, and pacified the region. This principle encouraged the use of the army for the occupation of the desired territories. Unfortunately, the use of the army frequently turned violent as the native populations naturally and justly resisted foreign control.

Cartoon of the European powers dividing up China. Image retrieved from
http://goo.gl/C4j6p8, for educational purposes only.
You are probably asking yourself whether the inhabitants of these territories were asked if they wanted to be occupied and governed by a foreign power. Sadly, in most cases, they were not consulted. Racism and the sense of European supremacy led these powers to think of their occupations as a mission to civilize these societies of savages, or at least inferior technology.
The thinking used to divide up Africa was repeated in various settings, such as the Middle East, India, China, and the islands of the Pacific. The distribution of these territories often conflicted with the interests of one or more European powers. Great Britain was quite frequently at odds with other countries because this empire claimed to occupy a strip of land that ran from Cairo, in Egypt, to the Cape of Good Hope, in South Africa. However, this plan clashed with the territorial aspirations of Portugal and Germany. As you will see in the topics to come, Great Britain’s success in World War I allowed the Empire to achieve its imperialist objective.

The famous colonizer and explorer Cecil Rhodes, represented as a giant encompassing the territorial pretensions of Great Britain in Africa, from Cairo to the Cape.
Image retrieved from http://www.allposters.es/-sp/Cecil-Rhodes-Statesman-Financier-Imperialist-Caricatured-as-a-Colossus-Bestriding-Africa-Posters_i1866489_.htm, for educational purposes only.
In other territories, protectorates were established. In this system, the occupied territory pledged its loyalty to the protecting country, trusting the country with its defense and the management of its foreign relations. The “protected” country was permitted to maintain some political offices and institutions at a local level. Great Britain used this system in places such as Sudan, Malaya (now Malaysia), and the Cook Islands in Oceania. France’s protectorates included Indochina (now Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam), Morocco, and Polynesia in Oceania. And Germany’s protectorates were Rwanda, Burundi, and Samoa.
Toward the beginning of the twentieth century, the European empires reached their apex. The British Empire was particularly successful. In 1922, when it achieved its largest territorial extent, the empire had one fifth of the total world population and one fourth of the total territory under its control. You will enjoy watching the following video which will tell you more about the British Empire. Showing glimpses from the life of Queen Victoria, this video demonstrates the slow beginning of her country’s transformation.
Click to view video
BS. (2006, May 23). Queen Victoria’s Empire: Engines of Change Part 1 of 16 [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JZE5kFXyQFo


You probably would not have imagined that during the reign of Queen Victoria, people in England died before turning forty-five or that there were people living in poverty. This documentary has shown you how an invention (the steam engine) began the transformation of a nation and the world.
6.3 US Expansionism
Parallel to European pretensions and conquests, the United States of America experienced an extended period of territorial expansion and economic growth throughout the nineteenth century. From the time of its Independence, the United States pursued a clear goal, stretching its territory all the way to the Pacific Ocean. To accomplish this objective, it was necessary to negotiate with countries such as Spain, France, and Great Britain. As you saw in the previous module, Mexico suffered from the expansionist goals of the neighbor to the north when the US seized the northern half of its territory (now California, New Mexico, Arizona, and Texas).
Near the end of the nineteenth century, the country boasted political stability, economic growth, and a capable army. Inspired by these advantages, US politicians, and leading magnates proposed a scheme whereby the country could establish its own colonial empire.
In order to accomplish its ambitions, the United States set its sights on the colonies of Spain in the Caribbean and the Pacific. This goal pitted the countries against each other in the Spanish-American War of 1898. The overwhelming success of the United States permitted the country to assume control of the Cuban economy, as well as effective occupation of territories such as Puerto Rico, the Philippines, and the Mariana Islands.

Pictorial allegory of the triumph of the United States in gaining its new territorial possessions.
Image retrieved from http://goo.gl/kM7GZV, for educational purposes only.
Following this event, the United States established itself as a world power with colonial possessions and the marketing advantage in its sphere of power and influence. From that point on, European powers were no longer alone on the international scene in their pursuit of economic and political interests.
Conclusion
Can you imagine the conditions that the colonial populations lived in? The great majority of the native inhabitants suffered in this time. They were forced to work, but the product of their work was taken from them. They were forced to move and constantly suffered the violation of their human rights. But not all, which is left behind from imperialism, is negative. This period experienced a time of economic prosperity that permitted the growth of the middle class in many countries. This time also enjoyed many inventions and scientific advances. The exploration and occupation of territories also motivated botanical, zoological, and anthropological exploration, adding greatly to our knowledge of nature.
As you will see in later topics, the vast majority of these territories began to gain their Independence following World War II, establishing themselves as new countries within the international order. The most obvious legacy of imperialism is reflected in cultural, linguistic, and legal aspects that can still be observed in these now-independent countries.
Checkpoint:
Check to see if you can do the following:
Introduction
Now that you have understood the development of militarism, nationalism, and imperialism, the time has come for you to study one of the most dramatic events that humanity has gone through: World War I (WWI). The WWI is one of the most dramatic events of history because it was the first world conflict that resulted in tremendous loss of life. In this topic, we will study the variables and events that caused the outbreak of the war. We will also study how the war progressed and take a look at its consequences.
In addition, we will analyze the Russian Revolution, a conflict that was unleashed in Russian in 1917 when a group of leaders with a socialist ideology rebelled against the despotic regime of Czar Nicholas II, of the Romanov dynasty. Autocratic means that the czar’s authority was not regulated by a set of laws; therefore, his authority had no limits. As a result of this revolution, the Soviet Union would be formed (U.S.S.R.), later becoming one of the new world superpowers. This country would play an extremely important role on the international scene.
To know more about the World War II review the following video carefully http://ed.ted.com/on/pFXXPH1B and answer the questions that are at the end of it.


Explanation
7.1 Background and Causes of the Great War
Near the end of the nineteenth century, the European powers struggled to gain supremacy, seeking to expand their area of influence and control both on the continent and in the colonial regions. In a situation of desperate competition, political leaders quickly recognized the need to establish favorable alliances in case an international conflict should break out.
Because of this concern, Great Britain joined France and Russia in an alliance that would later become known as the Triple Entente or Entente Cordiale. On the other hand, unified Germany joined with Austria-Hungary and later on with the Ottoman Empire as well, an alliance which then became known as the Central Empires or Central Powers.
Once these blocs, or alliances, were formed, they rapidly commenced an arms race. Unified Germany experienced a rapid process of industrialization and militarization under the direction of Kaiser Wilhelm II (emperor from 1888 to 1918). The Kaiser ordered the construction of a naval fleet that would rival the British fleet in quantity, capacity, and technology. Great Britain immediately recognized the threat in this situation and began to modernize its armada and naval forces.

Europe at the beginning of the Great War: Great Britain in light red, France in dark blue, Germany in gray, Italy in olive green, Austria-Hungary in orange,
the Ottoman Empire in dark red, Greece in sky blue, Spain in yellow, and Serbia in mustard.
Image retrieved from http://hillfighter.deviantart.com/art/Europe-1914-191590480, for educational purposes only.
It is of the utmost importance that we also discuss the Balkan Peninsula. This region in Europe, which by this time had been divided up by several empires, constantly showed itself to be a powder keg of ethnic and political differences. In this region, Austria-Hungary controlled what is now Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Croatia and Slovenia, while Russia maintained a strategic Alliance with Serbia. The Ottoman Empire had traditionally controlled great portions of the Balkan territories, but it lost them at the end of the nineteenth century with the independence of Bulgaria, Romania, and Greece.
It was precisely in this region where the crucial event occurred which is normally considered the cause for the breakout of war. The event was the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary. On a visit to the city of Sarajevo the 28th of June, 1914, the archduke was killed by a group of Bosnian nationalists closely connected to the radical Serbian group called “The Black Hand.”
Recognizing the delicacy of the situation, the European powers began a month of diplomatic talks, but to no avail. On July 28, 1914, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia, Immediately alert, Serbia’s ally, Russia, declared a state of war one day later. By August 1st, Germany declared war on Russia. Then, Russia, failing to secure the support of France, declared war on France on August 3rd. Following Germany’s invasion of Luxemburg and Belgium, Great Britain declared war on Germany and its allies on the August 4th.
As you can see, the succession of war declarations was like a game of dominoes, one falling after another, until virtually all of Europe found itself in a state of war in a question of five days. We will now talk about the war’s progress, as well as its consequences.
7.2 Progress and Consequences of the Great War
With the respective war declarations, the world suddenly faced one of the most severe armed conflicts in its history. Since the European powers possessed multiple colonies, war was waged in practically every corner of the planet. Even if the great majority of the battles and violence took place mainly in Europe, other regions (such as Oceania, Africa, and Asia) experienced the horrors of war and a period during which there was a lack of raw material and commodities.
Germany began its military campaign with the invasion of Belgium and the north of France, while Austria-Hungary focused on the invasion of Serbia. The Ottoman Empire focused on invading Persia, on internal issues, and on the Middle East, conducting a genocide of Kurds and other minorities.
Faced with these actions, the Entente took a defensive role. Russia invaded from the east, pushing back the central empires’ armed forces while Great Britain and France attacked from the west. Great Britain, it is important to note, depended on its armadas from its dominions and colonies, which showed great loyalty in conflict, especially India.
This was the first war in which the air force was fully deployed as an element of war. It was also the first in which modern chemical warfare (toxic gases) were employed. At sea, the renovated German and British floats participated for the first time. Another first in this war was the use of large ships and submarines.
The First World War served as the stage for the debut of the new war technology. Among the new technology, were planes and submarines, which permitted the rise of aerial warfare and the sophistication of sea battles, respectively. There were also important innovations on land, such as the introduction of tanks in warfare and the use of chemical weapons, including toxic gases. Obviously, these innovations intensified combat and were particularly detrimental to civil populations.
Trench warfare Image retrieved from http://goo.gl/3AaoGP for educational purposes only.
Halfway through the war, the fronts had become fields full of trenches, a new method of defense appropriate for modern tactics and weapons. The trenches were long holes in the earth protecting the soldiers. The trenches, in turn, were protected by barbed wire and minefields. With this new war tactic, tanks played a key role.
In 1917, the German minister of external affairs, Arthur Zimmermann, sent a telegram to the government of Venustiano Carranza in Mexico, offering him economic support and the territories of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona if he entered in Alliance with Germany against the United States. Carranza refused the offer. However, the British intercepted the message and revealed it to the United States.
To travel to the Era, hear the following music inspired by the World War I.
Play Stop
By 1917, the balance of war was leaning in favor of Great Britain and its allies. This advantage was even more pronounced with the United States’ entrance into the war on April 6, 1917. The United States entered the war in response to the many ships sunk by German submarines, as well as in response to the scandal of the Zimmerman telegram.
By 1918, it was obvious that the central empires could not avoid defeat. By mid-1918, the German people began to rise up demanding an end to the war and the abdication of Wilhelm II. By fall, Austria-Hungary had collapsed and dissolved. On October 30th, the Ottoman Empire officially surrendered, and on November 11th, Germany signed an armistice that put an end to the war.
The consequences of the war for the central empires were catastrophic. The three emperors lost their thrones. Austria-Hungary dissolved and its territories was divided among several countries. The Ottoman Empire lost most of its territories and became a republic named Turkey, Also, in Germany the monarchy was removed from power and the leaders forced to sign the humiliating Treaty of Versailles. In this treaty, the country gave up some 65,000 km of territory and 7 million inhabitants. In addition, Germany was limited in its war capacity and industrial activities.
By the end of the war, it is estimated that at least 10 million people had died, leaving Europe in ruins. With the geopolitical changes following the war, Great Britain, France, and the United States were established as the new world powers. A further result of the war was the idea to establish an international organization that would try to regulate international conflicts and avoid war. The result was the League of Nations, predecessor to the modern-day United Nations.
7.3 The Russian Revolution and the Creation of the Soviet Union

Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin (Image retrieved from http://goo.gl/HNb7gp, for educational purposes only).
Following several consecutive military failures, the Russians were sick and tired of war. In February of 1917, several factors contributed to unrest. The woes of winter, the scarcity of food, and accumulated resentment against the czar finally exploded in a series of grassroots movements. The uproar of the people was so strong and uncontrollable, that on March 2nd, Nicholas II abdicated the throne of Russia. The czar was not replaced by his son or his brother. Instead the Duma (Russia’s legislative assembly) proclaimed a provisional regime and officially abolished the monarchy.
The new regime suspended war with the central empires in order to try to establish peace within the country. However, antagonistic political groups fomented a continual state of uneasy calm. In October of 1917, a new revolution began in Russia that is now commonly known as the Bolshevik Revolution. This new conflict pitted the Reds (socialists) against the Whites (moderates in favor of the monarchy). Although the reds occupied the main cities of the country and even signed a peace treaty with the central empires (Treaty of Brest-Litovsk), the whites regained ground with the help of foreign allies (such as Great Britain), and civil war stretched out several more years.
By 1920, the Reds, under the leadership of Lenin, finally gained command. This victory prepared the way for establishing, on December 30th, 1922, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. This country would eventually become a superpower during the twentieth century, rivaling the United States for world supremacy. To learn more about the Russian Revolution, we invite you to watch the following video:
Click to view video
Essex, T. (Producer.) (1964). The Great War [TV series].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GQUAW_CdBds


Conclusion
In this topic, you have learned about World War I and the Russian Revolution. Even though these armed conflicts resulted in the loss of many lives, we invite you to reflect on their geopolitical legacy. By studying this type of event, we can better understand our current world order, modern political boundaries, and international organizations.
As you will see in the following topics, the world of the twentieth century remained a perilous world of constant change. Millions of lives were affected by these changes and events: changes in nationality, the rise and fall of regimes and entire nations, the appearance of new technology, and the transformation of society.
Checkpoint
Check to see if you can do the following:
Introduction
It was only twenty-one years after the end of World War I (1918) when World War II erupted (1939). However, some important events occurred in this period. International efforts to maintain peace and avoid another world conflict would fail, as you will see further on.
In this period, a serious collapse of the world economy left many countries in a state of poverty and hunger. In addition, resentment over the humiliating defeat in World War I and the rise of totalitarian government would create a tense situation in Europe. This situation would begin to show the absolute failure of the League of Nations and efforts to bring the nations into agreement.
Explanation
8.1 Policies of Appeasement and the League of Nations
Following World War I, the leading European governments adopted an open policy of appeasement. With this policy, they hoped to avoid at any cost the breakout of a new armed conflict in Europe. As part of these efforts, an international organization emerged which was to guarantee security and international cooperation: the Society or League of Nations.
The League of Nations was developed in accordance with resolutions in the Treaty of Versailles, which we discussed in the previous topic.  The principal mission of the League of Nations was to maintain world peace. It was to provide an international court where conflicts would be moderated and an institutional setting for the discussion of matters of international significance. The first meeting of the League of Nations was conducted on November 15th, 1920, in the city of Geneva, Switzerland. Forty-two countries participated, though the United States was noticeably absent, since US Congress had not approved joining the institution.

Meeting of the League of Nations in its headquarters in Geneva (Image retrieved from http://goo.gl/WNTDK1 for educational purposes only)
As you will learn further on in this topic, totalitarian regimes arose, beginning in the 1930s, in countries such as Italy and Germany. These leaders adopted an aggressive policy: militarization, occupation of neighboring territories, and a defiant position on the international scene. The policy of appeasement let these actions slide, under the assumption that war would thus be avoided. Nevertheless, the inevitable clash of policies was only postponed and exacerbated.
The leading exponent of this appeasement policy was Neville Chamberlain, Prime Minister of Great Britain, who not only tolerated, but also came to an agreement with the totalitarian regimes. He allowed Germany to annex Austria and the Sudeten mountains (the region of the modern-day Czech Republic. He permitted Italy to invade Ethiopia and Albania. And he stood by as Francisco Franco, one of the most controversial dictators in the twentieth century, took over Spain.
8.2 Economic Depression and World Recession
Front page of a newspaper announcing the collapse of the stock market in New York. Image retrieved from
http://galleryhip.com/1929-stock-market-crash-wall-street.html, for educational purposes only.
On October 29, 1929, the New York Stock Exchange crashed, ushering in one of the most difficult periods of economic crisis for modern capitalism. But what caused the collapse of the stock market? Post-war governments had faced a difficult economic situation that required serious decisions. Rather than risk economic disaster, they opted for printing paper money and borrowing money. These actions stimulated sustained inflation (a general rise in prices).
In spite of the bad economic omens after the war, the United States had experienced a period of accelerated growth, exceeding Great Britain as the strongest world economy. This new optimism for capitalism gave way to an era of wastefulness and hasty decisions. In this careless attitude, many began to speculate on the stock market. Speculation is a phenomenon whereby stockholders (investors in the stock market) begin to establish and manipulate the price of stocks (titles for ownership of a fraction of a company’s capital stock) on a subjective basis. That is, they played with the prices based on a gut feeling or the impulse of the moment. This phenomenon can lead to an economic bubble, in which capital is built on a nonexistent foundation until the moment when markets react to insolvency (inability to pay debts and/or outstanding balances) and collapse. This collapse came in 1929.
When the stock market crashed, international markets also reflected the loss. The great magnates who lost their fortunes in a question of seconds suddenly closed industries and businesses of all types, leaving many without jobs. The impact of these events was soon felt around the world, in the loss of international trade, high unemployment, shortages, and consequently, poverty.
The crisis stretched into the 30s and affected practically every country. It was in this situation of desperation and depression that totalitarian governments managed to gain voters’ support. These leaders promised to work economic miracles and begin public works to stimulate the economy and recover stability.
To learn more about the causes of the Depression, we invite you to watch the following video:
Click to view video
 






8.3 The Rise of Totalitarian Government in Europe
Totalitarian governments are those regimes in which the state assumes control of all aspects of the citizens’ lives, severely limiting individual freedoms. Traditional government functions include organization, administration, the national economy, and the military. Totalitarian governments assume these functions and more. They seek to control their citizens’ ideology and religion, their exposure to art and culture, their moral behavior, and even who can be married and when.
In this between-wars period, several totalitarian governments prospered in Europe, most notably Nazi Germany and fascist Italy. The first of the two administrations, to become established, was fascism under Benito Mussolini. This movement, created by Mussolini, proclaimed itself to be a midpoint between capitalism and socialism. Fascist ideology was built on a foundation of violence, disdain for the middle class, uncontrolled nationalism, expansionist ambition, and absolute opposition to Marxism.
Mussolini came to power in 1922 and began the process of transforming Italian society. Even though Italy was nominally a monarchy, the leader soon adopted dictatorial powers and began to call himself Il Duce. Far from hiding his expansionist aspirations, Mussolini promoted the establishment of a new Roman Empire. This goal was reflected in his regime’s propaganda and monumental architecture. These desires were soon transformed into the reality of military offensives, beginning with the invasion of Ethiopia and Albania.

To help promote his ideology and leadership, Hitler conducted massive political rallies in the city of Nuremberg,
surrounding himself with the armed forces and the ranks of his party.
Image retrieved from https://goo.gl/a7flaO , for educational purposes only.
The rise of Nazism in Germany began in 1932 when this party became the strongest political force in the country. Two years later, Hitler would become chancellor. At that point, he had built a complex network of armed forces and secret police which facilitated his seizure of absolute power. Hitler’s totalitarianism was even more aggressive than that of Mussolini, openly declaring his racist ideology and anti-Semitism (hate for Jewish people). As you know, these dangerous tendencies prepared the way for tragedy during World War II.
Before the breakout of renewed world conflict, Hitler carried out a violent policy against minorities (Jews, homosexuals, gypsies, the mentally ill, and so on), while stimulating pride in an idealized German nation. Hitler described a nation peopled by a superior race (the Aryan race) that worshipped none other than Hitler himself, under the title of führer, a German term for “leader” or “chief.”
Nazism pursued its imperialist aspirations through coercion and violence, annexing Austria and the Czech Sudeten region. These policies were just the beginning of an aggressive, irrational plan that would result in one of the blackest events in world history.
Conclusion
Once you have learned about the main events of the period between wars, you are prepared to understand the reasons for the breakout of World War II. As you have seen, a combination of variables unchained the world crisis. At the same time, these variables created the atmosphere that permitted totalitarian regimes and violent ideologies to develop. These new developments proved to be highly dangerous.
These precedents help us to understand key elements of the twentieth century. You are now ready to learn about World War II. This war is the most serious conflict which humanity has yet faced.
Checkpoint
Check to see if you can do the following:
